people often think the word doubt
spelling is a little crazy because of
the letter B since it doesn't spell a
sound most folks can't figure out what
it's doing there but in spite of what
most of us learn in school sound is
never the most important aspect of
spelling an English word the words
meaning and history need to come first
to doubt means to question to waver to
hesitate as a noun it means uncertainty
or confusion the present-day English
word doubt started as a latin word du
Bottari it first moved from Latin into
French where it lost both its book sound
and its letter B and then it came into
English in the 13th century about a
hundred years later scribes who wrote
English but also knew Latin started to
reinsert the B into the word spelling
even though no one pronounced it that
way but why would they do this why would
anyone in their right mind reinsert a
silent letter into a spelling well
because they knew Latin the scribes
understood that the root of doubt had a
B in it over time even as fewer literate
people knew Latin the B was kept because
it marked important meaningful
connections to other related words like
dubious and indubitably which were
subsequently borrowed into English from
the same Latin root do Bottari
understanding these historical
connections not only helps us to spell
doubt but also to understand the meaning
of these more sophisticated words but
the story doesn't end there
if we look even deeper we can see beyond
the shadow of a doubt just how revealing
that B can be there are only two base
words in all of English that have the
letters D o u b1 is doubt and the other
is double we can build lots of other
words on each of these bases like
doubtful and doubtless or doublet and
redouble and doubloon
it turns out that if we look into their
history we can see that they both derive
from the same Latin forms the meaning of
double - is reflected in a deep
understanding of doubt see when we doubt
when we hesitate we second-guess
ourselves when we have doubts about
something when we have questions or
confusion where of two minds
historically before English began to
borrow words from French it already had
a word for doubt that old English word
was a on a word whose relationship to
two is clear in its spelling as well so
the next time you're in doubt about why
English spelling works the way it does
take a second look what you find just
might make you do a double-take
you